# Style and Design Overview

Styling the look and feel of your experiment elements is often a time-consuming
process. However, it is worthwhile because participants are likely to view your
task as more professional, user-friendly, and engaging if there is an appealing
design. Smile provides a number of tools to help you cleanly and consistenly
style your experiments.

## Tailwind CSS

Smile uses the Tailwind CSS framework for help with styling interface elements
and layouts. Tailwind is a particular approach to CSS that favors atomic
classes. Tailwind also provides easy ways to support theming, color modes, color
pallets, etc... We describe
[how to use Tailwind to determine the look and feel of your experiment](/styling/tailwind).
Of course, you can style your components with custom CSS as well or overwrite
Smile defaults for your entire project.

## Dark Mode

Smile supports dark mode. This is a great way to make your experiments more
appealing to participants. We describe how to enable dark mode in your
experiments [here](/styling/darkmode). (_Dark mode is of course optional and
only makes sense for some research questions._)

## UIKit Components

Smile provides a number of built in components to help you style your
experiments. We describe how to use these components in your experiments
[here](/styling/uikit). These components build upon Radix UI and Shadcn-Vue
which provides high levels of accessibility and design consistency.

## Layouts

Smile provides a number of layouts to help you structure your Views. We describe
how to use layouts in your experiments [here](/styling/layouts). This can help
you save time and ensure that your Views are consistent and easy to understand.

## Icons

Icons are a helpful way to add polish and help users understand the interface.
We describe how to use these icons in your experiments [here](/styling/icons).

## Forms and Quizes

Smile provieds some built in tools to help you build forms and quizes. We
describe how to use these tools [here](/styling/forms).

## Image and Videos

Many experiments present videos or images to participants. We describe how to
distribute [images and videos](/styling/imagesvideo) with your Smile project,
how to preload them so that they appear immediately when needed, and how to
display them in your experiment.
