# üôã‚Äç‚ôÄÔ∏è Getting help

Smile is a free, open-source project and is provided with no warranty or
guarantee of support. Effective use of this project assumes you know modern
[Javascript](https://javascript.info/) syntax, have some familiarity with typing
commands in a terminal program, git, [GitHub](https://github.com), and
understand basic concepts about web servers and web design. Smile is designed to
make life easier **for programmers/developers**.

::: warning Wait, I thought you said this makes life fun and easy?

Yes. <SmileText/> makes common development tasks easier and more fun for people
who are already programmers. It lower the amount of code you need to write to
make a complex web experiment, test it, and deploy it online. Smile glues
together many services that you would otherwise have to configure yourself.
However, there are better packages and services for people looking for no-code
solutions that avoid the need to program altogether including
[Qualtrics](https://www.qualtrics.com/),
[SurveyMonkey](https://www.surveymonkey.com/), and
[Google Forms](https://www.google.com/forms/about/).

:::

That all said, if you need help or are stuck we have collected some useful
resources.

## Documentation

Obviously, if you are reading this you are aware of the extensive documentation.
You might be surprised how often common issues can be addressed by carefully
reading the documentation. We put a lot of time into making it as clear and
comprehensive as possible and keep it up to date.

## Other resources

Technically, <SmileText/> is simply a collection of open-source tools that have
been integrated into a single project. As a result, you can also look at the
documentation for the underlying tools. For example, the following links might
help learn more about the underlying technologies:

### Javascript

Most of the code you need to write for <SmileText/> is in Javascript. Here are
are useful resources for learning Javascript:

- [Modern Javascript](https://javascript.info) - a great resource for learning
  Javascript
- [Interneting is hard](https://www.internetingishard.com) - Friendly web
  development tutorials for complete beginners

### Vue.js

The core of <SmileText/> is built using the Vue.js framework. Here are some
resources for the parts of the Vue.js ecosystem used in the project:

- [Learn Vue](https://learnvue.co) - useful website for learning the Vue.js
  framework
- [Vuejs tutorial](https://vuejs.org/tutorial/#step-1) - A tutorial for learning
  Vue.js
- [Vuejs docs](https://vuejs.org/guide/introduction.html) - Complete docs for
  Vue.js
- [Vue Router](https://router.vuejs.org/) used to jump between different pages
  on the timeline
- [Pinia](https://pinia.vuejs.org/) is used to manage the underlying application
  state
- [VueUse](https://vueuse.org/) collection of Vue utilities used in the project

### Vite

Vite is the build tool used in the project. This compiles together the various
libraries used during development so they load quickly on the participant's
browser. In addition, Vite enables fast development of complex front-end
Javascript applications. Here are some resources for learning more about Vite:

- [Vite](https://vitejs.dev/) - the Vite docs are quite comprehensive
- [Vitepress](https://vitepress.vuejs.org) - this documentation website uses
  Vitepress, a static site generator built on Vite

### CSS/Styling

- [Bulma](https://bulma.io) - the CSS framework used in the project. The docs
  are quite intuitive.

### Github

- [Git for beginners](https://medium.com/dwarsoft/git-for-beginners-part-i-basic-git-concepts-a7beb5a136d)
- [Github Actions](https://docs.github.com/en/actions) - used to deploy the
  project

### Unix/Shell commands

- [The missing semester of your CS education](https://missing.csail.mit.edu) -
  how to use the shell/terminal program, git, security concepts/encryption
- [Shell.how](https://www.shell.how) - helps you learn and interpret different
  shell/terminal commands

## GitHub Discussions

If you can't find an answer to your question in the documentation, you can try
posting in the [GitHub Discussions](https://github.com/NYUCCL/smile/discussions)
on the base repo. This is a good place to ask questions, share tips, and propose
new features.

## GitHub Issues

If you think you have found a bug in the software, you can open an issue on the
[GitHub Issues](https://github.com/NYUCCL/smile/issues). Please provide as much
information as you can and also first search existing issues (both open and
closed).
